2024-09-03 update : adding spatial vignette. (#143)
CDCgov/ww-inference-model: vignettes/spatial_wwinference.Rmd

      // Add button to plots
      $(this).find('img').wrap('<pre class=\"plot\"></pre>');
      $('pre.plot', this).prepend("<div class=\"showopt\">Show Plot</div><br style=\"line-height:22px;\"/>");
      $('pre.plot', this).children('img').addClass('folded'); // Default to hide plots

    }
  });

  // Hide all chunks when document is loaded
  $('.folded').css('display', 'none');

  // Function to toggle the visibility
  $('.showopt').click(function() {
    var label = $(this).html();
    if (label.indexOf("Show") >= 0) {
      $(this).html(label.replace("Show", "Hide"));
    } else {
      $(this).html(label.replace("Hide", "Show"));
    }
    $(this).siblings('code, img').slideToggle('fast', 'swing');
  });
});
</script>

<style>
.showopt {
  background-color: #004c93;
  color: #FFFFFF;
  width: 100px;
  height: 20px;
  text-align: center;
  vertical-align: middle !important;
  float: right;
  font-family: sans-serif;
  border-radius: 8px;
  cursor: pointer; /* Add cursor pointer for better UX */
}

.showopt:hover {
  background-color: #dfe4f2;
  color: #004c93;
}

pre.plot {
  background-color: white !important;
}
</style>

# Start

> Here we present the way simulating and fitting with 3 separate models using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we present the way simulating and fitting with three separate models using the
```

`wwinference` package.  We also compare the results a number of ways to see
the value of using spatial components within the model.

<div class="fold s">
```{r warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
library(wwinference)
library(dplyr)
library(tibble)
library(tidyr)
library(ggplot2)
library(patchwork)
library(scoringutils)
library(ggh4x) # for facet_grid2
```

# Generating Data

We start by generating the data that our models require, using the

> `generate_simulation_data` function.  The presets that are required to use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`generate_simulation_data()` function.  The presets that are required to use the
```

I think this will link to the docs (and should be done everywhere).

    size = 5
  ) +
  geom_text(
    aes(label = ID, x = x, y = y),
    vjust = -1
  ) +
  coord_cartesian(
    xlim = c(min(fake_locs$x) - 2, max(fake_locs$x) + 2),
    ylim = c(min(fake_locs$y) - 2, max(fake_locs$y) + 2)
  ) +
  labs(
    title = "Fake Locations",
    x = "X Coordinate",
    y = "Y Coordinate"
  ) +
  theme_bw()

fake_locs_plot
```

## Central Rt Curve
Another requirement that we need to have based of the model definition, is a
central Rt curve that is the underlining behavior of the pathogen.  Here we
visualize the central Rt curve that is used in this vignette, but any central
Rt can be used here.

<div class="fold s">
```{r}
r_in_weeks <- c(
  rep(1.1, 5), rep(0.9, 5),
  0.9 + 0.0005 * (1:16)^2
)
lng <- length(r_in_weeks)
central_rt_curve <- ggplot() +
  geom_line(
    aes(
      x = 1:lng,
      y = r_in_weeks
    )
  ) +
  geom_point(
    aes(
      x = 1:lng,
      y = r_in_weeks
    )
  ) +
  geom_hline(
    yintercept = 1,
    color = "blue",
    linetype = "dashed",
    alpha = .7
  ) +
  scale_y_continuous(transform = "log10") +
  xlab("Week") +
  ylab("Rt Value") +
  ggtitle("Central Rt curve") +
  theme_bw()

central_rt_curve
```

## Simulating data

> Now we simulate the data with 3 different data generation models.  The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we simulate the data with three different data generation models.  The
```

(I think for numbers < 10 use words)

    )
  ) +
  scale_y_continuous(transform = "log10") +
  xlab("") +
  ylab("Subpopulation R(t)") +
  labs(color = "Sites") +
  theme_bw()

site_rt_total_plot
```

### Visual of correlation matrix
One other thing that we want to visualize, because it is the key difference
between the data generation models, is the site to site correlation matrix.
Here we do that, faceted by data generation model, we provide a scale that
gives level of correlation.  We also make the area of each circle correspond
with the correlation, so larger the area of the circle, larger the correlation.
To remind ourselves, IID will have no correlations between wastewater sites.
Exponential will have correlations between wastewater sites that are based off
the exponential correlation function that uses the distances between wastewater
treatment plants.  Rand. Corr. Matrix will have correlations between wastewater
treatment plants that are based off some unknown factors, to emulate this we
just set random correlations between sites.

<div class="fold s">
```{r fig.height=5, fig.width=10}
# Correlation Visuals ----------------------------------------------------------
corr_matrix_df <- rbind(

>   simulated_data_iid$corr_matrix %>%

Reviewer 2: This actually would be a lovely plot function for the package, but def think we can make it a separate issue.

>   simulated_data_iid$corr_matrix %>%

Reviewer 2: I have a controversial opinion that I like vignettes that at least in one instance show you how to plot the data without a wrapper function (though I think here since it is repetitive and verbose, there is an argument for eventually putting these plots in wrapper functions)

>   simulated_data_iid$corr_matrix %>%

Reviewer: That's not too controversial IMO. But yeah here it's repetitive so I think simplifying it is worth it

  forecast_date = forecast_date,
  calibration_time = calibration_time,
  forecast_horizon = forecast_horizon,
  model_spec = get_model_spec(
    generation_interval = generation_interval,
    inf_to_count_delay = inf_to_hosp,
    infection_feedback_pmf = infection_feedback_pmf,
    params = params
  ),
  fit_opts = get_mcmc_options(
    iter_warmup = iter_warmup,
    iter_sampling = iter_sampling
  ),
  compiled_model = model,
  dist_matrix = NULL,
  corr_structure_switch = 0
)
# ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Exponential data to Exponential model ----------------------------------------
fit_exp_to_exp <- wwinference::wwinference(
  ww_data = ww_data_to_fit_exp,
  count_data = hosp_data_preprocessed_exp,
  forecast_date = forecast_date,
  calibration_time = calibration_time,
  forecast_horizon = forecast_horizon,
  model_spec = get_model_spec(
    generation_interval = generation_interval,
    inf_to_count_delay = inf_to_hosp,
    infection_feedback_pmf = infection_feedback_pmf,
    params = params
  ),
  fit_opts = get_mcmc_options(
    iter_warmup = iter_warmup,
    iter_sampling = iter_sampling
  ),
  compiled_model = model,

>   dist_matrix = as.matrix(exp_corr_param$dist_matrix),

Author: This is set above.

    )
) %>%
  mutate(
    gen_model_type = "Rand. Corr. Matrix"
  )
# ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
all_pred_draws_df <- rbind(
  iid_pred_draws_df,
  exp_pred_draws_df,
  rand_pred_draws_df
) %>%
  mutate(
    inf_model_type = factor(
      inf_model_type,
      levels = c(
        "Exponential",
        "Unstructured",
        "IID"
      )
    ),
    gen_model_type = factor(
      gen_model_type,
      levels = c(
        "IID",
        "Exponential",
        "Rand. Corr. Matrix"
      )
    )
  )
```

## Preparing sampled draws for correlation matrix
Here we prepare results for visualizing the correlation matrix posterior
distributions.  Again this is not a required step, but this is not included in
the `wwinference` vignette.

We start by looking at the raw draws of our fit object, then subset teh draws
by non_norm_omega, which is the matrix that contains nonnormalize correlations.
For more information on normalized vs nonnormalize correlations, refer to the
model definitions.  We then make a dataset that has a two columns indicating
which site to site pair the correlation value is for.  The last column is the

> correlation value.  We also do this for each of the 9 fits we did above, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We also do this for each of the 9 fits we did above, and
```

> combine them into one dataset iwth columns indicating waht data generation model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
combine them into one dataset with additional columns indicating which data generation model
```

        "Site \\1",
        variable
      ),
      inf_model_type = "Exponential"
    ) %>%
    select(
      -variable
    ),
  fit_iid_to_unstruct$fit$result$draws(
    variables = "non_norm_omega",
    format = "draws_array"
  ) %>%
    as.table() %>%
    as.data.frame() %>%
    mutate(
      Row = sub(
        "non_norm_omega\\[(\\d+),\\d+\\]",
        "Site \\1",
        variable
      ),
      Column = sub(
        "non_norm_omega\\[\\d+,(\\d+)\\]",
        "Site \\1",
        variable
      ),
      inf_model_type = "Unstructured"
    ) %>%
    select(
      -variable
    )
) %>%
  mutate(
    gen_model_type = "Rand. Corr. Matrix"
  )
# ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
all_corr_matrix_draws_df <- rbind(
  iid_corr_matrix_draws_df,
  exp_corr_matrix_draws_df,
  rand_corr_matrix_draws_df
) %>%
  mutate(
    inf_model_type = factor(
      inf_model_type,
      levels = c(
        "IID",
        "Exponential",
        "Unstructured"
      )
    ),
    gen_model_type = factor(
      gen_model_type,
      levels = c(
        "IID",
        "Exponential",
        "Rand. Corr. Matrix"
      )
    )
  )
```

# Visualizing Fits

> Here we visualize all the results, for each one, we look at the 95th quantile

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we visualize all the results. For each one, we look at the 95th quantile
```

of the parameters we are interested in.

## Hospital admissions and wastewater

> Here we showcase the hospital admissions and wastewater results.  Here we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we showcase the hospital admissions and wastewater results.  We
```

facet again by the data generation model.  The colors represent the different
inference models, where the only difference between the inference models are
the assumed correlation structure.  Solid lines are medians of the

> distributions, solid dots are data points used to in fitting, open dots are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
distributions, solid dots are data points used to fit the model, open dots are
```

for evaluation purposes.  The vertical dashed line represents the date that we
told the model to begin forecasting which ends based off the forecast horizon
specified in the model presets.  The nowcasting period will be from the period
from the last solid dot to the dashed line.  The forecast period is the period
after the dashed line.  Below hospital admissions, we have the wastewater

> posterior predictive, with the same notations as the hospital admissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
concentration posterior predictions, with the same notations as the hospital admissions.
```

Exploring these results, we see that all models do relatively well to include

> evaluation points, open dots, in their 95th quantiles.  Evaluation metrics will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
evaluation points, open dots, in their 95th quantiles.  Later in the vignette, evaluation metrics will
```

> be used to place numerical values on model performances, this section will be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be used to quantify forecast performance.
```

> towards the end of the vignette.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    )
) +
  geom_ribbon(
    data = ww_ribbon_data,
    aes(x = date, ymin = lower, ymax = upper, fill = inf_model_type),
    alpha = 0.1
  ) +
  geom_line(
    data = ww_ribbon_data,
    aes(x = date, y = median, color = inf_model_type),
    size = 1,
  ) +
  geom_point(
    aes(x = date, y = observed_value)
  ) +
  geom_vline(aes(xintercept = lubridate::ymd(forecast_date)),
    linetype = "dashed"
  ) +
  xlab("") +
  ylab("Genome copies/mL on Log Scale") +
  facet_grid(subpop ~ gen_model_type, scales = "free_y") +
  guides(
    fill = guide_legend(
      title = "Assumed Corr. Structure"
    ),
    color = guide_legend(
      title = "Assumed Corr. Structure"
    )
  ) +
  scale_fill_manual(
    breaks = c("Exponential", "Unstructured", "IID"),
    values = c("darkviolet", "deeppink3", "darksalmon")
  ) +
  scale_colour_manual(
    breaks = c("Exponential", "Unstructured", "IID"),
    values = c("darkviolet", "deeppink3", "darksalmon")
  ) +
  theme_bw()
# ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(hosp_result_plot / ww_result_plot) +
  plot_layout(guides = "collect") &
  theme(legend.position = "bottom")

> ```

Reviewer 2: Could add some language on any differences in forecast performance you see across inference models or data generating models (where the data generating model differences are likely due to the forecasting problems being different degrees of difficulty).

## Rt curves, global and site

> Here we showcase the global and site level Rt's.  Notation is the same as
> hospital admissions and wastewater results, except here the actual global and
> site Rt curves are plotted for visual evaluation.  These actual curves are not
> used by the model, so these curves must be inferred by the model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we showcase the global and site level Rt's.  Notation is the same as
hospital admissions and wastewater results, except here the true simulated global and
site Rt curves are plotted for visual evaluation. The true simulated R(t) curves are latent
quantities that must be inferred by the model.
```

> We do very well to capture the actual Rt curves, there is some concern with how

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We do very well to capture the actual Rt curves. There is some concern with how
```

> high the inferred Rt reaches toward the nowcasting and forecasting periods.  This
> is not surprising as there is no data there to guide the model for a more
> accurate quantile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
high the inferred Rt reaches toward the nowcasting and forecasting periods.
We expect to see higher uncertainty in the nowcasting and forecasting periods
because the Rt is only partially or not at all informed by recent data. 
```

    size = 1.25,
  ) +
  geom_hline(
    yintercept = 1,
    color = "blue",
    alpha = .7,
    size = 1,
    linetype = "dashed"
  ) +
  geom_line(
    data = site_rt_data_full %>%
      mutate(gen_model_type = model_type),
    aes(x = date, y = value),
    size = 1.25
  ) +
  geom_vline(
    xintercept = lubridate::ymd(forecast_date),
    linetype = "dashed"
  ) +
  xlab("") +
  ylab("Site Rt") +
  facet_grid(subpop ~ gen_model_type, scales = "free_y") +
  guides(
    fill = guide_legend(
      title = "Assumed Corr. Structure"
    ),
    color = guide_legend(
      title = "Assumed Corr. Structure"
    )
  ) +
  scale_fill_manual(
    breaks = c("Exponential", "Unstructured", "IID"),
    values = c("darkviolet", "deeppink3", "darksalmon")
  ) +
  scale_colour_manual(
    breaks = c("Exponential", "Unstructured", "IID"),
    values = c("darkviolet", "deeppink3", "darksalmon")
  ) +
  scale_y_continuous(trans = "log10") +
  theme_bw()
# ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

global_rt_result_plot / site_rt_result_plot +
  plot_layout(
    guides = "collect",
    heights = c(1, n_sites)
  ) &

>   theme(legend.position = "bottom")

Reviewer 2: The fit to the aux site looks pretty off in the random correlation matrix. 

what percent fo the population is covered by wastewater data in this study? Just feel like that should be more identifiable from the trend in hospital admissions. Perhaps the prior on the subpopulation R(t) deviations is actually too tight since it seems to be inferring something very close to 1 for all data generating models.

>   theme(legend.position = "bottom")

Reviewer 2: I think it would be helpful if the legend indicated that the colors are the inference models!

Reviewer 2: Bc assumed correlation structure could be a little confusing in that it could be used to generate data too

      y = inf_model_type,
      colour = inf_model_type
    ),
    height = 0.2,
    size = 1
  ) +
  geom_vline(
    data = corr_matrix_df %>%
      filter(model_type == "Rand. Corr. Matrix") %>%
      mutate(
        Row = Var1,
        Column = Var2
      ),
    aes(xintercept = value),
    color = "red",
    linetype = "dashed",
    size = 1
  ) +
  facet_grid(Row ~ Column, switch = "y") +
  scale_fill_manual(
    breaks = c("Exponential", "Unstructured"),
    values = c("darkviolet", "deeppink3")
  ) +
  scale_colour_manual(
    breaks = c("Exponential", "Unstructured"),
    values = c("darkviolet", "deeppink3")
  ) +
  ylab("") +
  xlab("Correlation Drawed") +
  ggtitle("Data Generation Model : Rand. Corr. Matrix") +
  labs(
    color = "Assumed Corr. Structure",
    fill = "Assumed Corr. Structure"
  ) +
  theme_bw() +
  theme(
    axis.text.y = element_blank(),
    axis.ticks.y = element_blank()
  )
# ------------------------------------------------------------------------------

iid_corr_matrix_result_plot + exp_corr_matrix_result_plot +
  rand_corr_matrix_result_plot +
  plot_layout(
    guides = "collect"
  ) &
  theme(legend.position = "bottom")

> ```

Reviewer 2: it looks to me like the prior on phi might still be a little too tight, as the exponential fit to the data generating iid model should in theory be able to estimate a (very high I think) phi which would revert back to an identity matrix. 

Interesting, and perhaps worrisome, that the exponential model appears to be estimating the randome correlation matrix better than the fully unstructured inference. I wonder if we just need to make the distances a bit more extreme to see more of a difference.

> # Numeric Results

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Quantitative Forecast Evaluation Results
```

> For this section we explore how well our models did numerically.  The metrics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this section we explore how well our forecasts performed quantitatively.  The metrics
```

        `Evaluation Score` == "ess_per_sec" ~ "ess/sec",
        .default = `Evaluation Score`
      )
    ) %>%
    group_by(gen_model_type, `Evaluation Score`) %>%
    mutate(
      scaled_score = (Score - min(Score)) / (max(Score) - min(Score))
    ) %>%
    ungroup() %>%
    mutate(
      model = factor(
        model,
        levels = c(
          "IID",
          "Exponential",
          "Unstructured"
        )
      ),
      gen_model_type = factor(
        gen_model_type,
        levels = c(
          "IID",
          "Exponential",
          "Rand. Corr. Matrix"
        )
      )
    )
) +
  geom_tile(
    aes(x = model, y = `Evaluation Score`, fill = scaled_score),
    color = "black"
  ) +
  geom_text(
    aes(
      x = model,
      y = `Evaluation Score`,
      label = sprintf("%.2f", Score)
    ),
    color = "black",
    size = 3.5
  ) +
  facet_wrap(~gen_model_type) +
  scale_fill_gradient(
    low = "white",
    high = "dodgerblue"
  ) +
  guides(fill = "none") +
  labs(fill = "Score Relative to Metric") +
  ggtitle("Hospital Admission Forecast Period Evaluation Metric") +
  ylab("Evalutation Metric") +
  xlab("Assumed Correlation Structure") +
  theme_bw()
```

> Here we show the raw scores for the forecast period, where model is the

Reviewer 2: There is probably a nicer way to print this table, but for a separate issue.

    color = "black"
  ) +
  geom_text(
    aes(
      x = model,
      y = `Evaluation Score`,
      label = sprintf("%.2f", Score)
    ),
    color = "black",
    size = 3.5
  ) +
  facet_wrap(~gen_model_type) +
  scale_fill_gradient(
    low = "white",
    high = "dodgerblue"
  ) +
  guides(fill = "none") +
  labs(fill = "Score Relative to Metric") +
  ggtitle("Hospital Admission Nowcast Period Evaluation Metric") +
  ylab("Evalutation Metric") +
  xlab("Assumed Correlation Structure") +
  theme_bw()
```

Here we show the raw scores for the nowcasting period, where model is the
inference model and gen_model_type is the data generation model.

```{r}
# Raw Scores :
hosp_scores_nowcast %>%
  summarize_scores(by = c("model", "gen_model_type")) %>%
  inner_join(
    ess_per_sec_df,
    by = c("model", "gen_model_type")
  )
```

### Hospital admissions evaluation scores plot
Here we showcase the evaluation metric scores.

```{r}
(hosp_eval_nowcast_plot + hosp_eval_forecast_plot) /
  (hosp_by_date_eval_nowcast_plot + hosp_by_date_eval_forecast_plot) +
  plot_layout(guides = "collect") &
  theme(legend.position = "bottom")

> ```

Reviewer 2: Consider adding some interpretation

forecast_horizon <- 28

generation_interval <- wwinference::default_covid_gi
inf_to_hosp <- wwinference::default_covid_inf_to_hosp

# Assign infection feedback equal to the generation interval
infection_feedback_pmf <- generation_interval

model <- wwinference::compile_model()

iter_warmup <- 250
iter_sampling <- 500
```

## Fitting iid data
We start with fitting the data generated from the IID model to the three types
of inference models.  These three types of inference models are differing only
by their assumed correlation structure, as mentioned above.

<div class="fold s o">
```{r warning=FALSE, message=FALSE}
# IID data to IID model --------------------------------------------------------
fit_iid_to_iid <- wwinference::wwinference(
  ww_data = ww_data_to_fit_iid,
  count_data = hosp_data_preprocessed_iid,
  forecast_date = forecast_date,
  calibration_time = calibration_time,
  forecast_horizon = forecast_horizon,
  model_spec = get_model_spec(
    generation_interval = generation_interval,
    inf_to_count_delay = inf_to_hosp,
    infection_feedback_pmf = infection_feedback_pmf,
    params = params
  ),
  fit_opts = get_mcmc_options(
    iter_warmup = iter_warmup,

>     iter_sampling = iter_sampling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    iter_sampling = iter_sampling, 
    seed = 123
```
Add this anywhere else the model is being fit for reproducibility!

</style>

# Start

> Here we present the way simulating and fitting with three separate models using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here we present a workflow to simulate and fit three separate models using
```

# Generating Data

We start by generating the data that our models require, using the

> `generate_simulation_data()` function.  The presets that are required to use the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`generate_simulated_data()` function.  The presets that are required to use the
```

I will look up how to link this, I just tested and it didn't seem to work properly
